
# Discussion

We studied how the size of white-fronted goose families is related to where, when and with how many flockmates they are seen in the wintering grounds. We found support for the effect of the size of successful families on how far they migrate from the breeding grounds, but only later in winter. Further, the number of successful families in flocks was higher in the west.
We also confirmed that family size decreases over the winter, but found that it is insensitive to flock size, and shows mixed responses to summer predation. Families are less likely to split later in winter, and with increasing family size. We found only indirect evidence that flights are responsible for family splits in winter.
We showed that flocks are smaller farther from the breeding grounds, and found that they increase in size over the winter. Additionally, larger flocks have more successful families. The proportion of first year birds in flocks is lower in larger flocks, but increases as winter progresses.

Social status has been found in previous studies to influence geese's selection of wintering sites, with dominant social units displacing subordinate ones from optimal wintering locations [@vangilder1985differential; @JOFO:JOFO087]. Our finding that larger families winter to the west of the study area is similar to one found by @jongejans2015naar. It fits the idea that dominant social units occupy optimal wintering sites if the spatial distribution of white-fronted goose families reflects habitat suitability. Geese can exploit most of the highly productive landscape, and have become tolerant of human disturbance and previously deterrent structures such as wind turbines [@madsen2008animal; @Fox2017a]. Any habitat selection is thus likely to be against conditions that impede foraging, such as snow and ice cover coupled with strong winds [@philippona1966geese]. Geese tolerate snow depths of ca. 15cm, conditions in excess of which are not noted in the Netherlands before midwinter [@philippona1966geese], and have become rare within the study period. Western areas near the North Sea coast may be expected to benefit from its moderating effect on temperature, with fewer instances of conditions that geese would prefer to avoid. This could explain why adults with juveniles would choose to winter there after midwinter. The movement of geese to the south later in winter has been reported before, with peak counts of white-fronted geese in the Netherlands in November [@sovon2015watervogels], but only in January in Belgium [@devos2010aantallen].

Juvenile independence has been reported across goose taxa [eg. @prevett1980snow; @johnson1988weak; @black1989parent] as being concurrent with the arrival of spring. Previous studies have shown that spring copulation in the breeding pair triggers juvenile departure [@prevett1980snow; @fischer1965triumphgeschrei]. We find support for the hypothesis that the number of juveniles with adults decreases through the winter.
The dissociation of juveniles from parents should result in some families losing their only offspring, thus reducing the number of successful families counted in flocks over time. Our finding that the number of families seen in flocks increases with time contradicts this expectation. An explanation would be that social status predicts variation in spring migration timing, as it does the autumn arrival [@jongejans2015naar], but previous studies have not found such an effect [@madsen2001spring; @Bêty2004].
Migration related juvenile mortality has previously been shown to be significant in long distance migrants that make few stop-overs. It has been shown that the probability of barnacle geese from Svalbard successfully reaching the wintering grounds in Scotland (3,500 km away) is dependent on a number of factors. Important among these is the higher competition for resources that results from an increased abundance of geese at summer sites. In deteriorating tundra habitats, juvenile geese are suggested to be unable to accumulate the reserves necessary for migration, and thus fail to complete the journey. Similar effects are suggested in lesser snow geese [@francis1992survival], and our result that the number of juveniles seen in families prior to migration is higher than in the first two months on the wintering grounds is in line with this prior work. As Arctic geese reach super-abundance, reduced juvenile recruitment due to density dependent effects might help stabilise populations [@francis1992survival].

Summer predation, in turn driven by the cyclical abundance of Arctic rodents, is another mechanism by which the populations of Arctic-breeding birds, including those of geese, are suggested to be regulated prior to migration [@summers1986breeding; @summers1987factors; @blomqvist2002indirect etc.]. Recent studies however indicate that since the 2000s, the breeding success of Baltic-North Sea flyway white-fronted geese no longer seems to be correlated with summer predation [@jongejans2015naar]. This may explain our findings that the number of juveniles in successful families is not affected by summer predation intensity. Notably, the Pannonian population of white-fronted geese, which breeds on the Taimyr Peninsula, continues to show a correlation with predation, and by extension with rodent abundance.
It has been suggested that more Baltic-North Sea white-fronted geese now breed on Kolguyev Island where they experience a constant level of predation, since the island lacks lemmings and associated phenomena [@kruckenberg2008white].
A large Arctic breeding range (45°E - 85°E, ca. 1,800km, Baltic-North Sea population) likely means that variation in predation pressure is lost due to year-wise averaging across sites. Future models could correct for this by accounting for predation at the summering site of each family observed in winter. Finally, lemming cycles in northern Russia appear to be faltering and this could also explain why cyclicity in goose breeding success has been reduced [@nolet2013faltering]. @angerbjorn2001geographical have shown that the cyclicity of lemming populations in Fennoscandia has been previously disrupted and re-established in the later-19th and 20th centuries. This lends support to the idea that northern Russian lemming cycles might be undergoing similar temporary disruption, following which they could be restored.

The increase in the number of juveniles seen with marked geese during years of increased predation could suggest that facing high predation pressure, geese either fledge large families or fail entirely. This could be the case if geese more effective at repelling predators also have higher fecundity. Body size may be an important driver. It has been observed that larger emperor geese *A. canagica* and white-fronted geese are better than smaller species at defending clutches from terrestrial predators [@thompson1987emperor], and that larger black brent and lesser snow geese have higher fecundity than smaller ones [@ECY:ECY19957682404; @davies1988body], lending some support to the idea.
Migration mortality might also be a significant factor in the decoupling of family size and summer predation.

Bird migration is strictly constrained by metabolic factors. Energy reserves and water balance especially determine how far and how fast a bird can fly, where it must stop-over, and thus by extension, where it terminates migration [@Klaassen57]. Our finding that flocks are smaller to the west of the wintering area (approx. 3 - 4°E) fit well in this context, and it is to be expected that fewer geese would choose to winter farther west when climatically suitable and similarly agricultural sites can be found to the east.
Our results that larger flocks had a lower proportion of first-year birds must be considered in the context of the previous outcome that flocks are smaller in the west, where they have more successful families, and that larger families also winter to the west. This likely results in a higher juvenile proportion from small flocks, producing the trend we see.
Consequently, one would expect a higher proportion of juveniles in westerly regions, as reported previously at the country scale [@jongejans2015naar], but we did not find that flock juvenile proportion varies over the study site. This is contrary to the expectation that goose families selecting for optimal sites drive variation in juvenile proportion over wintering areas [eg. @JOFO:JOFO087]. However, independent juveniles observed in wintering flocks [eg. @hanson1953dominance; @gregoire1990agonistic; @JANE:JANE325] may dampen any variation.

The result that flock juvenile proportion rises non-linearly over the winter is in line with the previous finding that the number of successful families in flocks increases with time. However, this trend is probably due in larger part to white-fronted geese being age-differentially migratory, with pairs without young leaving the breeding grounds earlier than families and juveniles. An effect of age on spring departure timing has been unsuccessfully sought for in similar species [snow geese, @Bêty2004; pink-footed geese @madsen2001spring]. In snow geese, the continued influx of juveniles to the breeding grounds for some weeks after the arrival of the breeding population does suggest that independent yearling geese follow a different migration schedule from adults [@prevett1980snow]. The question of age-differential migration would ideally be resolved with age-ratios of flocks in starting on spring migration. Since the population likely does not receive an influx of juveniles towards the end of winter, we must conclude that juveniles do indeed leave later than adults in spring.

Finally, our findings that daily split probability decreases with the distance travelled, and is reduced later in winter are fairly novel. They contradict the consensus that geese are likelier to become independent towards spring [@prevett1980snow; @johnson1988weak; @black1989parent; @scheiber2013social]. Given that we did not differentiate between juvenile separation, juvenile death, and separation of the breeding pair in our analysis, this coupled with our low sample size of 13 families could have biased the results.
Nonetheless, our results that the number of flights undertaken by a family were a good predictor of whether it would split are in accordance with the idea that flights are disruptive events that contribute to family separation [@prevett1980snow]. As we have found, one would expect that in such scenarios larger families are easier to locate and cohere to. The positive relation between the probability of splitting at each half hour and the time since the last take-off is best ascribed to a very low sample size of 6 families in which only 8 splits were recorded.

Our results add significantly to the extant knowledge of greater white-fronted geese. White-fronted goose families likely leverage their dominance to occupy optimal sites as winter progresses. Simultaneously, they undergo a steady reduction in the number of associated juveniles. Our findings show that young split off from families earlier than previously thought in this species in which families are reported to remain together through the winter, and sometimes longer than a year [@10.2307/4088245; @ely1979breeding; @kruckenberg2005young]. Remaining on the wintering grounds later than other social classes, families and independent juveniles make this population differentially migratory by both age and social class. Previous authors [@madsen2001spring; @Bêty2004] have sought such an effect, and we present it as a novel finding for European geese. At the policy level, this provides support for the continued yearly cessation of wild goose hunting in January, especially since families and juveniles tend to cluster and are already over-represented in autumn hunting bags [@Madsen2010].

*Acknowledgements* - This manuscript was written under the supervision of Andrea Kölzsch (Max Planck Institute for Ornithology, Radolfzell), and Kees Koffijberg (SOVON Vogelonderzoek Nederlands). We thank the many observers who entered data on *geese.org* and counted flocks, Yke van Randen who provided *geese.org* data, the Dutch Association of Goose Catchers who caught geese for tagging, and Gerhard Müskens and Peter Glazov who led the 2016 Kolguyev expedition. PRG was financially supported by the European Commission through the program Erasmus Mundus Master Course - International Master in Applied Ecology (EMMC-IMAE) (FPA 532524-1-FR-2012-ERA MUNDUS-EMMC).

---
