---
title: Storytelling
author: pg
headerincludes:
 - \usepackage{gentium}
---

Every year, millions of geese migrate from their Arctic breeding grounds to their winter quarters in the south, across Europe, Asia, and North America. Geese and their allies, the Anseriforms as a whole, represent a significant part of the twice annual movement of biomass to and from Europe. Given their herbivory and current numbers, they likely play an equally important role in the regulation of plant biomass in both their breeding and wintering areas. Indeed, in western Europe and in eastern Asia, wintering geese are seen as pests on agriculture, and have thus been historically persecuted by farmers, apart from their attractiveness to hunters.

For decades now, amateur ornithologists in western Europe, especially in Germany and the Netherlands, have observed flocks of these wintering geese and made note of their sizes and other attributes. This has been partly a result of a realisation in the fifties that the numbers of migrating geese were no longer even close to what they had been at the turn of that century, and the subsequent conservation and monitoring that was undertaken to restore goose numbers. Part of this process involved the fitting of coloured bands about the necks of geese caught either in the west and south in winter, or, less freqeuntly, in Russia or other parts of the Arctic in summer. This allowed birdwatchers to become citizen scientists and to contribute to studies of long distance migration in species which were, at the time, at historically low numbers.

Monitoring has continued since then, and as goose numbers have risen and their populations been largely restored to 19th century levels, its purpose has changed. Geese are treated once again as a menace that - if not blackening the sky just yet - is seen as not conducive to extracting profits from agricultural land. In western Europe, states now count geese and subject their populations to study in the context of crop losses and land management. Recent findings that show that goose numbers appear to be increasing without apparent resource limitation, and observations over the years indicate that geese may be undergoing a shift - generational even - in their preferred foraging sites within the wintering grounds, choosing cropland over natural areas. Coupled with climate change, which has resulted in warmer winters and earlier springs, this has prompted changes in the migration pattern of some species[^01].

One focus of the goose counting effort has been in assessing the age ratio of flocks, ie, the proportion of a flock that is in its first year: juveniles born that summer. These are not always easy to discern, especially since most species do not show significant age dimorphism. Greater White-fronted geese (*Anser albifrons*) are convenient in this regard because their first year juveniles lack the well defined adult plumage. Adult whitefronts are also easily set apart from other species of "grey" geese, and their juveniles may also be told from the adults of similarly sized species that are seen alongside in mixed flocks, such as the Pink-footed goose (*Anser brachyrhynchus*). Whitefronts are the most numerous of the wintering goose species of western Europe, and thus their population dynamics form an important avenue of research, both as a proxy for summer conditions in the tundra, and as a source of crop damage.

Goose observers report four major patterns in whitefront flocks from the Netherlands and northern Germany, which is our site of interest. At the level of the family, it appears that larger families winter more to the west. Larger families are seen in association with smaller flocks. Fewer large families are seen in the later stages of winter. At the level of the flock, flock sizes are reportedly smaller in the west. This sets up a tangle of possible interactions. Is it the case that larger families are seen in smaller flocks because these larger families winter in the west where flock sizes are smaller? Is it that larger families are better counted in the west where flock sizes are smaller, since they are more noticeable in smaller flocks? Or is it that geese without juveniles - pairs, or even single birds - avoid the west where families are larger and occupy the top of the dominance hierarchy - an important contributor to fitness - in flocks?

Not all of these question can be answered within the scope of a single master's thesis, nor are there perfect data that enable this. Instead, a number of disparate datasets are available. A long term dataset with a high frequency of observations since 2003 is available from SOVON, and is at the flock level.

[^01]: Barnacle geese (*Branta leucopsis*), for example, now show three distinct modes of life: the traditional populations are fully migratory, following established patterns of a slow spring migration with several stop-overs along their way back to the Arctic. Late migrating populations, however, spend early spring in the Netherlands and northern Germany, before making a series of long, quick journeys to reach the Russian tundra, avoiding stop-over sites which appear to have reached carrying capacity for spring-migrating geese. The final class of geese have become resident, breeding in the Netherlands.‰ @so