---
title: Geese 008: Goose distribution
bibliography: geese_citations.bib
csl: oikos.csl
fontsize: 12pt
papersize: A4
---
Greater White-fronted geese (*Anser albifrons*) are a member of the Anatidae, or duck family, similar in size but somewhat smaller than the common Greylag goose (*Anser anser*). They are named for the distinctive patch of white feathers at the base of the bill and beginning of the forehead. This is one of the distinguishing features, but adults are also identified in flight by the black tiger-stripe markings on the chest.

@madsen1999goose have compiled some of the most comprehensive information on the species in their book on *Goose Populations of the Western Palearctic*. The Greater White-fronted goose is an Arctic species, breeding in the tundra in both Eurasia and North America, and wintering across Europe and Asia, with one of the largest combined ranges among the geese. The Eurasian breeding range is now exclusively Russian, though it may have included Finland in the early 20th century [@alpheraky1904geese]. The breeding range stretches across northern Russia, from the Kanin peninsula (44°E) to the Kolyma river (155°E) in the Russian far-east.  From the perspective of their origin and wintering grounds, the Palearctic or Eurasian part of this species may be broadly divided into two populations -- a Western Palearctic population and an Eastern one. The Western Palearctic population breeds east of the Kanin peninsula (around 44°E) up to the Khatanga river (104°E), migrates west and south-west, and winters in Europe and southwest Asia, usually above 35°N. The Eastern Palearctic population breeds between the Khatanga and Kolyma rivers, winters in east and south-east Asia, and is not focused on here.

The Western Palearctic population was historically thought of as dividing into five groups in terms of its winter distribution: Baltic and North Sea (Western Europe and north Central Europe), Pannonia (Hungary, Slovakia and nearby countries), Pontus (the Balkans), Anatolia (Turkey) and Caspian Sea (the Caucasus and Iran) [@von1993handbuch, @cramp1977birds, and other bird guides]. @madsen1999goose, however, overturn this view and suggest that there is significant mixing within the population even though it appears to split into groups. They identify instead from ringing records five flyways along which geese from the breeding grounds, which have a significant extent, might reach the main wintering areas. They posit that mixing and resultant pair formations in the wintering grounds and at staging sites used by birds from two or more of the main wintering areas [@johnsgard1978ducks, @rutschke1987wildgeese] contributes to maintaining genetic diversity and prevents the formation of races (see the taxonomically difficult Bean goose (*Anser fabalis*)). This view differs from @owen1988pair, who believe that pair bonds in young geese are formed to favour the pairing of birds that have previously known each other from the breeding grounds and showed this in a study on Barnacle geese (*Branta leucopsis*) breeding on Spitsbergen. It may be accepted that

@Wildfowl271, studying the Whitefront population wintering in Slimbridge in the UK, used recoveries of ringed birds to identify the source of this population as the "Nenets National Area" in Russia, which at the time was held to encompass islands and coasts of the Barents and Kara Seas [@Shevareva1959], [Boyd in @sedgwick1961new] up to the 55°E longitude. Further, it was noted that the Slimbridge population was (and continues to be) part of a larger population that winters mostly in western Germany and the Netherlands. The breeding range of this larger population was said to extend as far as 70°E [@philippona1960het in Dutch]; in geographic terms to the mouth of the river Ob.

@Fox2017a, in a succint introduction to the issue of goose population management, provide a long term overview of the trends in goose populations in western Europe.
